---
title: Build a 2-Bay NAS and Media Server for $256, Disks Included
date: 2020-02-01
---

# I Built a 2-Bay NAS/Media Server for $256, Disks Included

At first, $300 may not seem like a great deal for a 2-bay NAS. A quick search on Amazon returns a 2-bay Synology DS218j NAS box for $167 (as of August 4th, 2019). Add a couple 2 TB HDDs, totalling $110, and you’ve got a NAS for $277. For storing files, that will work just fine, but who wants to pay that much for a machine that can only store files?

I was looking for a machine that I could stream my photos, music, and movies from; something that could run Plex or Emby. That meant I needed something more powerful, and in the NAS box market, computing power is seriously overpriced.

The Synology DS718+ can be used as a Plex server for streaming media, but that costs $400. Add the 2 TB HDDs, and it’s $510. Why would I spend that much when I can easily put together a more powerful NAS for less than $300?

## Lateral Thinking with Withered Technology

For a couple months, I considered buying a NAS box because I thought the only other option, for devices running more than one hard drive, was a desktop PC. The idea to use an old ThinkPad came to me when I was reading [this article](https://medium.com/@adamagb/nintendo-s-little-known-product-philosophy-lateral-thinking-with-withered-technology-bac7257d8f4) about one of Nintendo’s product design philosophies, *Lateral Thinking with Withered Technology*. I wondered how I could apply that philosophy to my own life. Then I saw a YouTube video about swapping a ThinkPad’s DVD drive with a solid state drive, and the idea hit me. I could use an old ThinkPad as a 2-bay NAS. I wrote up a list of pros and cons.

## Advantages of Using a ThinkPad T430 vs a NAS Box

* More powerful CPU for the price

* More RAM for the price

* Ability to customize every detail of the configuration

* Laptop battery acts as a backup power supply

* Built-in monitor for accessibility

* More control over device security

## Disadvantages of Using a ThinkPad T430 vs a NAS Box

* May not last as long as a NAS box because it is already a few years old

* Requires mobile hard drives, which are a little more expensive than traditional hard drives

* Not quite as simple to configure as a NAS box

* Swapping the main hard disk requires screw driving

## The Hardware and Costs

Instead of paying $500+ for a 2-bay NAS, I bought an old ThinkPad T430 (6 GB RAM, 320 GB SSD, Core i5–3320M CPU) for $85. Along with that, I bought a hard drive caddy (to swap out the DVD drive for another hard drive) for $17, and two 2 TB mobile hard drives for $77 a piece ($154 for both). Those four items, used to make my own media serving NAS, totalled $256 — about half the cost of the less-powerful Synology DS718+.

## How I Set It Up

When I first realized I could use an old ThinkPad with a hard drive caddy to get a nice 2-bay NAS, I had some decisions to make.

### The Computer

First, I had to decide which laptop to buy. Going with a ThinkPad was a no-brainer. ThinkPads are famous for their durability. Their widespread use in the business world, and their lack of popularity outside of that, means there are tons of inexpensive used ThinkPads floating around. Plus, ThinkPads are easy to upgrade. In my T430, swapping the DVD drive for a hard drive was as easy as flipping two switches on the bottom of the ThinkPad, and I only had to unscrew a couple screws to upgrade the 320 GB SSD that came with the ThinkPad. The whole process took about 10 minutes.

### The Operating System

After I had the hardware together, I had to put an operating system on the machine. I am already familiar with Linux, so I didn’t need to do much research. My top three favorite Linux distributions are Manjaro/Arch, Ubuntu/Debian, and Fedora. My favorite distribution to use on a daily basis is Manjaro because it’s so well-polished and performant. The problem with Manjaro as a NAS OS is that it is on a rolling release, which can sometimes result in instability. I haven’t ever had an issue with Manjaro’s stability, but I figured it is better to be safe than sorry, so I ruled out Manjaro for my NAS.

I ultimately went with Ubuntu, Xubuntu to be exact, because I am more familiar with *Apt* (the Ubuntu/Debian application manager) than with *RPM* (Fedora’s application manager). However, if you are new to Linux, I would recommend Fedora 30 over Ubuntu 18.04 because, even though Fedora 30 might not be quite as stable as Ubuntu 18.04, Fedora 30 has some nice performance gains which could result in things like less power consumption and less fan noise.

No matter which OS is used, I recommend using a lightweight desktop environment like *XFCE* or *KDE* because better performance is usually more important than nice looks when it comes to a NAS/media server.

### The Applications

After getting the operating system installed, I had to install the *Samba* file server application so that I could share folders across my home network. That was pretty easy. I found [this guide ](https://linuxconfig.org/how-to-configure-samba-server-share-on-ubuntu-18-04-bionic-beaver-linux)very helpful.

I have not installed Plex, Emby, or any other media server software yet, but that is easy enough to do. So far I have just been using the machine as a NAS, but it is nice to know that my NAS could handle media transcoding and serving if I decide to do that someday.

For finishing touches, I copied everything from my main hard drive to the second hard drive, then scheduled a job to copy new files each night. I also configured the machine with a sleep/wake schedule to further reduce power consumption and fan noise in the middle of the night when I’m trying to sleep. To configure the sleep/wake schedule, I used *rtcwake* and *Chrontab*. [This post](https://linux.die.net/man/8/rtcwake) helped me with *rtcwake*, and [this post](https://www.howtogeek.com/101288/how-to-schedule-tasks-on-linux-an-introduction-to-crontab-files/) helped me with *Chrontab*. I also installed Handbrake so I can rip media from discs using my external Blu-ray player.

## Would I Recommend It?

Putting together a nice media server/NAS with an old ThinkPad costs half as much as using a less-powerful NAS box, it’s more configurable, it comes with a built-in backup power supply (the laptop battery), it is not hard to put together, and it is fun! After six months, I am very pleased with my purchase, and I confidently recommend this approach to anyone with some tech skills. A bit of tinkering with an old ThinkPad results in a far better NAS and media server for the price.
